Set shape basis method (#276)
flatironinstitute/nemos: docs/how_to_guide/plot_05_transformer_basis.md

  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Converting NeMoS Bases To scikit-learn Transformers

(tansformer-vs-nemos-basis)=
## scikit-learn Transformers and NeMoS Basis

`scikit-learn` is a powerful machine learning library that provides advanced tools for creating data analysis pipelines, from input transformations to model fitting and cross-validation.

All of `scikit-learn`'s machinery relies on strict assumptions about input structure. In particular, all `scikit-learn` 
objects require inputs as arrays of at most two dimensions, where the first dimension represents the time (or samples) 
axis, and the second dimension represents features. 
While this may feel rigid, it enables transformations to be seamlessly chained together, greatly simplifying the 
process of building stable, complex pipelines.

On the other hand, `NeMoS` takes a different approach to feature construction. `NeMoS`' bases are composable constructors that allow for more flexibility in the required input structure. 
Depending on the basis type, it can accept one or more input arrays or `pynapple` time series data, each of which can take any shape as long as the time (or sample) axis is the first of each array;

> `NeMoS` design favours object composability: one can combine any two or more bases to compute complex features, with a user-friendly interface that can accept a separate array/time series for each input type (e.g., an array with the spike counts, an array for the animal's position, etc.).

Author: correct!

```{code-cell} ipython3
trans_bas.n_basis_funcs = 10
bas.n_basis_funcs = 100

print(bas.n_basis_funcs, trans_bas.n_basis_funcs)
```

As with any `sckit-learn` transformer, the `TransformerBasis` implements `fit`, a preparation step, `transform`, the actual feature computation, and `fit_transform` which chains `fit` and `transform`. These methods comply with the `scikit-learn` input structure convention, and therefore they all accept a single 2D array.

## Setting up the TransformerBasis

At this point we have an object equipped with the correct methods, so now, all we have to do is concatenate the inputs into a unique array and call `fit_transform`, right? 

```{code-cell} ipython3

# reinstantiate the basis transformer for illustration porpuses
composite_basis = counts_basis + speed_basis
trans_bas = (composite_basis).to_transformer()

# concatenate the inputs
inp = np.concatenate([counts, speed[:, np.newaxis]], axis=1)
print(inp.shape)

try:
    trans_bas.fit_transform(inp)
except RuntimeError as e:
    print(repr(e))

> ```

Author: cool

> ```

Author: I tried, but it prints the way too much stuff, so I am rolling back to my solution for now

...Unfortunately, not yet. The problem is that the basis has never interacted with the two separate inputs, and therefore doesn't know which columns of `inp` should be processed by `count_basis` and which by `speed_basis`.

You can provide this information by calling the `set_input_shape` method of the basis. 

> This can be called before or after the transformer basis is defined. The method extracts and stores the array shapes excluding the sample axis (which won't be affected in the concatenation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be called before or after the transformer basis is defined. The method extracts and stores the number of columns for each input. There are multiple ways to call this method:

- It directly accepts the input: `composite_basis.set_input_shape(counts, speed)`
...
```

It's too many lines to make a good looking suggestion, but I think this should be a list like the above, with only a single line per example (rather than a full code block, though ideally still with the copy button and syntax highlighting).

I don't think we need to show the `out = composite_basis.to_transformer().fit_transform(inp)` line in each of them, just show it at the end.

Similarly, should have an admonition (or another small paragraph?) mentioning that we are looking at all dimensions except the first (since the samples are irrelevant here), and show a 4-dimensional example.

`set_input_shape` directly accepts the inputs:

```{code-cell} ipython3

composite_basis.set_input_shape(counts, speed)
out = composite_basis.to_transformer().fit_transform(inp)
```

If the input is 1D or 2D, it also accepts the number of columns:
```{code-cell} ipython3

composite_basis.set_input_shape(5, 1)
out = composite_basis.to_transformer().fit_transform(inp)
```

A tuple containing the shapes of all the axes other than the first,
```{code-cell} ipython3

composite_basis.set_input_shape((5,), (1,))
out = composite_basis.to_transformer().fit_transform(inp)
```

Or a mix of the above.
```{code-cell} ipython3

composite_basis.set_input_shape(counts, 1)
out = composite_basis.to_transformer().fit_transform(inp)
```

You can also invert the order of operations and call `to_transform` first and then set the input shapes. 
```{code-cell} ipython3

trans_bas = composite_basis.to_transformer()
trans_bas.set_input_shape(5, 1) 
out = trans_bas.fit_transform(inp)
```

:::{note}

If you define a basis and call `compute_features` on your inputs, internally, it will store its shapes, 
and the `TransformerBasis` will be ready to process without any direct call to `set_input_shape`.
:::

> If for some reason you need to provide an input of different shape to an already set-up transformer, you must reset the 

Reviewer: I think this point should become an admonition (warning), without the example.

`TransformerBasis` with `set_input_shape`.

```{code-cell} ipython3

# define inputs with different shapes and concatenate
x, y = np.random.poisson(size=(10, 3)), np.random.randn(10, 2, 3) 
inp2 = np.concatenate([x, y.reshape(10, 6)], axis=1)

trans_bas = composite_basis.to_transformer()
trans_bas.set_input_shape(3, (2, 3)) 
out2 = trans_bas.fit_transform(inp2)
```

### Learn more

> If you want to learn more about how to select basis' hyperparameters with `sklearn` pipelining and cross-validation, check out [this how-to guide](sklearn-how-to).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to see how `TransformerBasis` allows us to make use of  `sklearn` pipelining and cross-validation machinery to select basis' hyperparameters, check out [this how-to guide](sklearn-how-to).
```
